---
layout: post
title:  Tiny URL
date:   2021-01-24 00:00:00 -0700
categories:
tags:
---

# Functional requirements

- Translate a long url to a short and unique url (write)

- Look up the long url from the short url given (read)

- The unique code is 6 characters

- The unique code has to be randomized

- Only users with account created can create short url.
  (so that we can have monitoring in place to avoid a single user bombard the 
  service with large amount of creations.)

- Monitoring & Analytics

# Non-functional requirements

 - Fault tolerant

 - Highly available

 - Minimize read/write latency

 - Scalable

 - Consistency : (point for discussion)

 - Durability

 - Minimize cost

 # APIs

 - logOn -> userToken (assuming using 3P providers like Google.)

 - logOff

 - createShortURL(userToken, longURL, (optional) expiryTime) -> shortURL

 - getLongURL(shortURL) -> longURL

 # Design

 For URL encoding, we can use base62 ('a-zA-Z0-9') or base64('a-zA-Z0-9' '-' '_').
 For base 62, it can generate approximately 62 ^ 6 = 56.8 billion unique URLs for
 a 6 character encoding.

 For URL generation, MD5 generates a hash of 128bits which can be translated to 
 21 characters after base64 encoding. If we want to use a 6-character unique ID, we
 will have to drop 15 characters which will increase the chance of collision. Hence,
 this solution is not optimal. MD5 also has a small chance of collision for inputs
 that are different. 

 Another idea for URL generation is to have a separate key generation service that
 pre-generates and maintains a pool of unique IDs. The application server queries 
 for the unique IDs from this service. This is a workable design, but the drawback
 is the added complexity on the key generation service.

 Another simpler design is as follows:

 1. At the time each app server starts, it does a single transactional commit
 to the data store to ask for a range of IDs. For eample, the first app server
 asks for a range of 1-100. The second app server asks for 101-200.

 2. After that, each app server is able to generate a range of unique IDs locally
 before it runs out locally. Once it runs out, it asks the data store again
 for a range of IDs.

 3. We can use base62/64 encoding to encode the uniqueID into a 6-char string.

 ```
          |App server 1|

 |LB| --> |App server 2| --> |Data store|

          |App server 3|
 ```

References 
[1](https://leetcode.com/discuss/interview-question/system-design/124658/design-url-shortening-service-like-tinyurl)
[2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YN7hCvBOFxk)
[3](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JQDHz72OA3c)